tutorial for developping a plugin (#166)
glpi-project/docdev: source/plugins/tutorial.rst

* ``🗋 composer.json`` files describes PHP dependencies for your project.
* ``🗋 package.json`` file describes JavaScript dependencies for your project.
* ``🗋 myplugin.xml`` file contains data description for :ref:`publishing your plugin <plugin_publication>`.
* ``🗋 myplugin.png`` image is often included in previous XML file as a representation for `GLPI plugins catalog <http://plugins.glpi-project.org>`_
* ``🗋 setup.php`` file is meant to :ref:`instantiate your plugin <plugin_minimal_setupphp>`.
* ``🗋 hook.php`` file :ref:`contains your plugin basic functions <plugin_minimal_hookphp>` (install/uninstall, hooks, etc).

.. _plugin_minimal_setupphp:

minimal setup.php
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

After running ``plugin.sh`` script, there muse be ``🗋 setup.php`` file in your ``📂 myplugin`` directory.

It contains the following code:

**🗋 setup.php**

.. code-block:: php
   :linenos:

   <?php

   define('PLUGIN_MYPLUGIN_VERSION', '0.0.1');

An optional constant declaration for your plugin version number used later in the ``plugin_version_myplugin`` function.

**🗋 setup.php**

.. code-block:: php
   :lineno-start: 3

   <?php

   function plugin_init_myplugin() {
      global $PLUGIN_HOOKS;

>       $PLUGIN_HOOKS['csrf_compliant']['myplugin'] = true;

Reviewer: It's been removed in GLPI v11, but seems still present on v10.

>       $PLUGIN_HOOKS['csrf_compliant']['myplugin'] = true;

Reviewer: I keep this one open for reference when working on the GLPI v11 version

   }

This instanciation function is important, we will declare later here `Hooks` on GLPI internal API.
It's systematically called on **all** GLPI pages except if the ``_check_prerequisites`` fails (see below).

> We declare here that our plugin forms are `CSRF <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cross-Site_Request_Forgery>`_ compliant even if for now our plugin does not contain any form.

Reviewer: I keep this one open for reference when working on the GLPI v11 version

   :alt: my plugin in confiuguration

Following those first steps, you should be able to install and activate your plugin from ``Configuration > Plugins`` menu.

Creating an object
------------------

| 📝 In this part, we will add an itemtype to our plugin and make it interact with GLPI.
| This will be a parent object that will regroup several "assets".
| We will name it "Superasset".

.. _commondntm_usage:

`CommonDBTM`_ usage and classes creation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This super class allows to manipulate MySQL tables from PHP code.
Your working classes (in the ``src`` directory) can inherit from it and are called "itemtype" by convention.

.. note::

    ℹ️ **Conventions:**

    * Classes must respedct `PSR-12 naming conventions <https://www.php-fig.org/psr/psr-12/>`_. Wa maintain a :doc:`guide on coding standards <../codingstandards>`

    * :ref:`SQL tables <dbnaming_conventions>` related to your classes must respect that naming convention: ``glpi_plugin_pluginkey_names``

        * a global ``glpi_`` prefix
        * a prefix for plugins ``plugin_``
        * plugin key ``myplugin_``
        * itemtype name in plural form ``superassets``

>     * :ref:`Tables columns Les champs de tables <dbfields>` must also follow some conventions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * :ref:`Tables columns <dbfields>` must also follow some conventions:
```

      return true;
   }

Framework usage
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Some few useful functions

.. code-block:: php

   <?php

   Toolbox::logError($var1, $var2, ...);

This method stored in ``glpi/files/_log/php-errors.log`` file content of its parameters (may be strings, arrays, objects, etc).

.. code-block:: php

   <?php

   Html::printCleanArray($var);

This method will display a "debug" array of the provided variable. It only accepts ``array`` type.

Common actions on an object
---------------------------

.. note::

    📝 We will now add most common actions to our ``Superasset`` itemtype:

    * display a list and a form to add/edit
    * define add/edit/delete routes

In our ``front`` directory, we will need two new files.

.. raw:: html

   <pre>
   📂 glpi
      📂 plugins
         📂 myplugin
            ...
            📂 front
               🗋 superasset.php
               🗋 superasset.form.php
            ...
   </pre>

.. warning::

    ℹ️ Into those files, we will import GLPI framework with the ofllowing:

    .. code-block:: php

        <?php

        include ('../../../inc/includes.php');

First file (``superasset.php``) will display liste of rows stored in our table.

> It will use the internal search engine ``show`` method of the :doc:`search engine <../devapi/search>`.

Reviewer: This doc currently target GLPI 10, we will adapt for GLPI 11 once merged.

**🗋 hook.php**

.. code-block:: php
   :lineno-start: 50

   <?php

   use GlpiPlugin\Myplugin\Superasset;
   use GlpiPlugin\Myplugin\Superasset_Item;

   ...

   function plugin_myplugin_getAddSearchOptionsNew($itemtype)
   {
       $sopt = [];

       if ($itemtype == 'Computer') {
           $sopt[] = [
               'id'           => 12345,
               'table'        => Superasset::getTable(),
               'field'        => 'name',
               'name'         => __('Associated Superassets', 'myplugin'),
               'datatype'     => 'itemlink',
               'forcegroupby' => true,
               'usehaving'    => true,
               'joinparams'   => [
                   'beforejoin' => [
                       'table'      => Superasset_Item::getTable(),
                       'joinparams' => [
                           'jointype' => 'itemtype_item',
                       ]
                   ]
               ]
           ];
       }

       return $sopt;
   }

As previously, you must provide an ``id`` for your new search options that does not override existing ones for ``Computer``.

> You can use a script from the ``tools`` folder of the GLPI git repository (not present in the "release" archives) to help you list the **id** already declared (by the core and plugins present on your computer) for a particular itemtype.

Reviewer: Should be added to GLPI 11 version (therefore I do not close this comment)

* Script extension is **not** checked by GLPI, you can load a PHP file as a JS script. You will have to force the mime-type in the loaded file (ex: ``header("Content-type: application/javascript");``).
* You can rely on ``Html::requireJs()`` method to load external resources. Paths will be prefixed with GLPI root URL at load.
* If you want to modify page DOM and especially what is displayed in main form, you should call your code twice (on page load and on current tab load) and add a class to check the effective application of your code:

.. code-block:: javascript
   :linenos:

   $(function() {
       doStuff();
       $(".glpi_tabs").on("tabsload", function(event, ui) {
           doStuff();
       });
   });

   var doStuff = function()
   {
       if (! $("html").hasClass("stuff-added")) {
           $("html").addClass("stuff-added");

           // do stuff you need
           ...

       }
   };

.. note::

    📝 **Exercises**:

    #. Add a new icon in preferences menu to display main GLPI configuration. You can use:

      * `tabler-icons <https://tabler-icons.io/>`_ (preferred), ex: ``<a href='...' class='ti ti-mood-smile'></a>``).

>       * `font-awesome v6 <https://fontawesome.com>`_, ex: ``<a href='...' class='fas fa-face-smile'></a>``).

Reviewer: True for GLPI 10 aswell?

>       * `font-awesome v6 <https://fontawesome.com>`_, ex: ``<a href='...' class='fas fa-face-smile'></a>``).

Reviewer 2: I think it can be the recommendation in GLPI 10 as well.

       }

       ...
   }

Several things to remember:

* Loading paths are relative to plugin directory.
* Scripts declared this way will be loaded on **all** GLPI pages. You must check the current page in the ``init`` function.
* Script extension is **not** checked by GLPI, you can load a PHP file as a JS script. You will have to force the mime-type in the loaded file (ex: ``header("Content-type: application/javascript");``).
* You can rely on ``Html::requireJs()`` method to load external resources. Paths will be prefixed with GLPI root URL at load.
* If you want to modify page DOM and especially what is displayed in main form, you should call your code twice (on page load and on current tab load) and add a class to check the effective application of your code:

.. code-block:: javascript
   :linenos:

   $(function() {
       doStuff();
       $(".glpi_tabs").on("tabsload", function(event, ui) {
           doStuff();
       });
   });

   var doStuff = function()
   {
       if (! $("html").hasClass("stuff-added")) {
           $("html").addClass("stuff-added");

           // do stuff you need
           ...

       }
   };

.. note::

    📝 **Exercises**:

>     #. Add a new icon in preferences menu to display main GLPI configuration. You can use:
> 
>       * `tabler-icons <https://tabler-icons.io/>`_ (preferred), ex: ``<a href='...' class='ti ti-mood-smile'></a>``).
>       * `font-awesome v6 <https://fontawesome.com>`_, ex: ``<a href='...' class='fas fa-face-smile'></a>``).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    #. Add a new icon in preferences menu to display main GLPI configuration. You can use `tabler-icons <https://tabler-icons.io/>`_:

      * ``<a href='...' class='ti ti-mood-smile'></a>``
```

       {
           $rights = [
               [
                   'itemtype' => Superasset::class,
                   'label'    => Superasset::getTypeName(),
                   'field'    => 'myplugin::superasset'
               ]
           ];

           return $rights;
       }

       static function showForProfile($profiles_id = 0)
       {
           $profile = new Glpi_Profile();
           $profile->getFromDB($profiles_id);

           TemplateRenderer::getInstance()->display('@myplugin/profile.html.twig', [
               'can_edit' => self::canUpdate(),
               'profile'  => $profile
               'rights'   => self::getAllRights()
           ]);
       }
   }

Once again, display will be done from a Twig template:

**🗋 templates/profile.html.twig**

.. code-block:: twig
   :linenos:

   {% import "components/form/fields_macros.html.twig" as fields %}
   <div class='firstbloc'>
       <form name="form" action="{{ "Profile"|itemtype_form_path }}" method="POST">
           <input type="hidden" name="id" value="{{ profile.fields['id'] }}">
           <input type="hidden" name="_glpi_csrf_token" value="{{ csrf_token() }}">

>            {% set  rnd = profile.displayRightsChoiceMatrix(rights, {

Reviewer 2: 'rnd' is never used

>            {% set  rnd = profile.displayRightsChoiceMatrix(rights, {
>                'canedit': can_edit,
>                'title': __("My plugin", 'myplugin'),
>            }) %}
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Extending standard rights
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If we need specific rights for our plugin, for example the right to perform associations, we must override the ``getRights`` function in the class defining the rights.

In defined above example of the ``PluginMypluginProfile`` class, we added a ``getAllRights`` method which indicates that the right ``myplugin::superasset`` is defined in the ``PluginMypluginSuperasset`` class.
This one inherits from ``CommonDBTM`` and has a ``getRights`` method that we can override:

**🗋 src/Superasset.php**

.. code-block:: php
   :linenos:

   <?php

   namespace GlpiPlugin\Myplugin;

   use CommonDBTM;
   ...

   class Superasset extends CommonDBTM
   {
       const RIGHT_ONE = 128;

       ...

       function getRights($interface = 'central')
       {
           // if we need to keep standard rights
           $rights = parent::getRights();

           // define an additional right
           $rights[self::RIGHT_ONE] = __("My specific rights", "myplugin");

           return $rights;
       }
   }

Massive actions
---------------

> User accessible GLPI massive actions allow to apply modifications to a selection.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
GLPI massive actions allow applying modifications to a selection.
```

                   echo Html::submit(__('Do it'), ['name' => 'massiveaction']) . "</span>";

                   break;
           }

           return parent::showMassiveActionsSubForm($ma);
       }

       static function processMassiveActionsForOneItemtype(
           MassiveAction $ma,
           CommonDBTM $item,
           array $ids
       ) {
           switch ($ma->getAction()) {
               case 'myaction_key':
                   $input = $ma->getInput();

                   foreach ($ids as $id) {

                       if (
                           $item->getFromDB($id)
                           && $item->doIt($input)
                       ) {
                           $ma->itemDone($item->getType(), $id, MassiveAction::ACTION_OK);
                       } else {
                           $ma->itemDone($item->getType(), $id, MassiveAction::ACTION_KO);
                           $ma->addMessage(__("Something went wrong"));
                       }
                   }
                   return;
           }

           parent::processMassiveActionsForOneItemtype($ma, $item, $ids);
       }
   }

.. note::

    📝 **Exercise**:

>     With the help of the official documentation on :doc:`massive actions <../devapi/massiveactions>`, complete in =your plugin above methods to allow the linking with a computer from "Super assets" massive actions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    With the help of the official documentation on :doc:`massive actions <../devapi/massiveactions>`, complete in your plugin the above methods to allow the linking with a computer from "Super assets" massive actions.
```

    You can display a list of computers with:

    .. code-block:: php

        Computer::dropdown();

It is also possible to add massive actions to GLPI native objects.

> TO achieve that, you must declare a ``_MassiveActions`` function in the ``hook.php`` file:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To achieve that, you must declare a ``_MassiveActions`` function in the ``hook.php`` file:
```

**🗋 hook.php**

.. code-block:: php
   :linenos:

   <?php

   use Computer;
   use MassiveAction;
   use GlpiPlugin\Myplugin\Superasset;

   ...

   function plugin_myplugin_MassiveActions($type)
   {
      $actions = [];
      switch ($type) {
         case Computer::class:
            $class = Superasset::class;
            $key   = 'DoIt';
            $label = __("plugin_example_DoIt", 'example');
            $actions[$class.MassiveAction::CLASS_ACTION_SEPARATOR.$key]
               = $label;

            break;
      }
      return $actions;
   }

Sub form display and processing are done the same way as you did for your plugin itemtypes.

.. note::

    📝 **Exercise**:
    As the previous exercise, add a massive action to link a computer to a "Super asset" from the computer list.

    Do not forget to use unique keys and labels.

Notifications
-------------

.. warning::

>     ⚠️ Access to an SNMP server is recommended; it must be properly configured in ``Configuration > Notifications`` menu.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    ⚠️ Access to an SMTP server is recommended; it must be properly configured in ``Setup > Notifications`` menu.
```

>     On a development environment, you can install `mailhog <https://github.com/mailhog/MailHog>`_ or `mailcatcher <https://mailcatcher.me/>`_ which expose a local SMTP server and allow you to get mails sent by GLPI in a graphical interface.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    On a development environment, you can install `mailhog <https://github.com/mailhog/MailHog>`_ or `mailcatcher <https://mailcatcher.me/>`_ which expose a local SMTP server and allow you to get emails sent by GLPI in a graphical interface.
```

    Please also note that GLPI does not send mails directly. It goes through a queue system.
    All "pending" notifications are visible in the ``Administration > Email queue`` menu.
    You can effectively send mails from this menu or by forcing the ``queuedmail`` automatic action.

The GLPI notification system allows sending alerts to the actors of a recorded event.
By default, notifications can be sent by email or as browser notifications, but other channels may be available from plugins (or you can add your own one).

That system is divided in several classes:

> * ``Notification``: the main object. It receives common data like name, activation, sending mode, event, content (``NotificationTemplate``), etc.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* ``Notification``: the triggering item. It receives common data like name, if it is active, sending mode, event, content (``NotificationTemplate``), etc.
```

   .. image:: /_static/images/Notification.png
      :alt: Add notification form

* ``NotificationTarget``: defines notification recipients.

>     It is possible to define actors from the calling object (author, assignee) or directly other actors (all users of a specific group).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    It is possible to define recipients based on the triggering item (author, assignee) or static recipients (a specific user, all users of a specific group, etc).
```

   .. image:: /_static/images/NotificationTarget.png
      :alt: Choose actor form

> * ``NotificationTemplate``: notification templates used to build the content, which can be choose from Notification form. CSS can be defined in this object, and it receive one or more ``NotificationTemplateTranslation`` instances.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* ``NotificationTemplate``: notification templates are used to build the content, which can be chosen from Notification form. CSS can be defined in the templates and it receives one or more ``NotificationTemplateTranslation`` instances.
```

   .. image:: /_static/images/NotificationTemplate.png
      :alt: Notification template form

> * ``NotificationTemplateTranslation``: receives templates content to be translated. Please note that in the absence of a defined language, the content will be applied regardless of the user's language.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* ``NotificationTemplateTranslation``: defines the translated template content. If no language is specified, it will be the default translation. If no template translation exists for a user's language, the default translation will be used.
```

    The content is dynamically generated with tags provided to the user and completed by HTML.

   .. image:: /_static/images/NotificationTemplateTranslation.png
      :alt: Template translation form

> All those objects are natively managed by GLPI core and does not require any development intervention from us.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All of these notification-related object are natively managed by GLPI core and does not require any development intervention from us.
```

We can however trigger a notification execution via the following code:

.. code-block:: php

   <?php

   use NotificationEvent;

   NotificationEvent::raiseEvent($event, $item);

> The ``event`` key corresponds to the triggering event name defined in the ``Notification`` object and the ``itemtype`` key to the related object.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The ``event`` key corresponds to the triggering event name defined in the ``Notification`` object and the ``item`` key to the triggering item.
```

To use this trigger in our plugin, we will add a new class ``PluginMypluginNotificationTargetSuperasset``.
This ones targets our ``Superasset`` object. It is the standard way to develop notifications in GLPI. We have an itemtype with its own life and a notification object related to it.

**🗋 src/NotificationTargetSuperasset.php**

.. code-block:: php
   :linenos:

   <?php

   namespace GlpiPlugin\Myplugin;

   use NotificationTarget;

   class NotificationTargetSuperasset extends NotificationTarget
   {

       function getEvents()
       {
           return [
               'my_event_key' => __('My event label', 'myplugin')
           ];
       }

       function getDatasForTemplate($event, $options = [])
       {
           $this->datas['##myplugin.name##'] = __('Name');
       }
   }

We have to declare our ``Superasset`` object can send notifications in our ``init`` function:

**🗋 setup.php**

.. code-block:: php
   :linenos:

   <?php

   use Plugin;
   use GlpiPlugin\Myplugin\Superasset;

   function plugin_init_myplugin()
   {
      ...

       Plugin::registerClass(Superasset::class, [
           'notificationtemplates_types' => true
       ]);
   }

> With this minimal code, it's possible to manually create using GLPI UI a new notification targeting our ``Superasset`` itemtype and with the 'My event label' event and then use the ``raiseEvent`` method with these parameters.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With this minimal code it's possible to create using the GLPI UI, a new notification targeting our ``Superasset`` itemtype and with the 'My event label' event and then use the ``raiseEvent`` method with these parameters.
```

.. note::

    📝 **Exercise**:
    Along with an effective sending test, you will manage installation and uninstallation of notification and related objects (templates, translations).

>     You can take example on (still incomplete) on :doc:`notifications in plugins documentation <notifications>`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    You can see an example (still incomplete) on :doc:`notifications in plugins documentation <notifications>`.
```

Automatic actions
-----------------

This GLPI feature provides a task scheduler executed silently from user usage (GLPI mode) or by the server in command line (CLI mode) via a call to the ``front/cron.php`` file of GLPI.

.. image:: /_static/images/crontask.png
   :alt:

To add one or more automatic actions to our class, we will add those methods:

* ``cronInfo``: possible actions for the class, and associated labels
* ``cron*Action*``: a method for each action defined in ``cronInfo``. Those are called to manage each action.

**🗋 src/Superasset.php**

.. code-block:: php
   :linenos:

   <?php

   namespace GlpiPlugin\Myplugin;

   use CommonDBTM;

   class Superasset extends CommonDBTM
   {
       ...

       static function cronInfo($name)
       {

           switch ($name) {
               case 'myaction':
                   return ['description' => __('action desc', 'myplugin')];
           }
           return [];
       }

       static function cronMyaction($task = NULL)
       {
           // do the action

           return true;
       }
   }

> To tell GLPI that automatic action does exists, you just have to install it:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To tell GLPI that the automatic action exists, you just have to register it:
```

            <lang>...</lang>
         </long>
      </description>
      <homepage>http://link/to/your/page</homepage>
      <download>http://link/to/your/files</download>
      <issues>http://link/to/your/issues</issues>
      <readme>http://link/to/your/readme</readme>
      <authors>
         <author>Your name</author>
      </authors>
      <versions>
         <version>
            <num>1.0</num>
            <compatibility>0.90</compatibility>
         </version>
      </versions>
      <langs>
         <lang>en_GB</lang>
         <lang>...</lang>
      </langs>
      <license>GPL v2+</license>
      <tags>
         <en>
            <tag>tag1</tag>
         </en>
         <lang>
            <tag>tag1</tag>
         </lang>
      </tags>
      <screenshots>
         <screenshot>http://link/to/your/screenshot</screenshot>
         <screenshot>http://link/to/your/screenshot</screenshot>
         <screenshot>...</screenshot>
      </screenshots>
   </root>

Take care of this XML file content, add a detailled description in several languages, representative screenshots and icon - make users want to install it ✰

> Finally, submit your XML file on the `dedicated page <http://plugins.glpi-project.org/#/submit>`_ of the plugins catalog (registration is required).

Reviewer: I've just added a note about that

Teclib' will receive a notification for this submission and after some checks, will activate the publication on the catalog.

Miscellaneous
-------------

Querying database
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Rely on :doc:`DBmysqlIterator <../devapi/database/dbiterator>`. It provides an exhaustive ``query builder``.

.. code-block:: php
   :linenos:

   <?php

   // => SELECT * FROM `glpi_computers`
   $iterator = $DB->request(['FROM' => 'glpi_computers']);
   foreach ($ierator as $row) {
       //... work on each row ...
   }

   $DB->request([
       'FROM' => ['glpi_computers', 'glpi_computerdisks'],
       'LEFT JOIN' => [
           'glpi_computerdisks' => [
               'ON' => [
                   'glpi_computers' => 'id',
                   'glpi_computerdisks' => 'computer_id'
               ]
           ]
       ]
   ]);

Dashboards
^^^^^^^^^^

Since GLPI 9.5, dashboards are available from:

* central page
* Assets menu
* Assistance menu

This feature is slitted in several concepts - sub classes:

> * a 26*24 placement grid (``Glpi\Dashboard\Grid``)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* a placement grid (``Glpi\Dashboard\Grid``)
```

> * a widgets collection (``Glpi\Dashboard\Widget``) to graphically display data
> * a data providers collection (``Glpi\Dashboard\Provider``) that queries the database
> * rights (``Glpi\Dashboard\Right``) on each dashboard
> * filters (``Glpi\Dashboard\Filter``) that can be displayed in a dashboard header and impacting providers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* a widgets collection (``Glpi\Dashboard\Widget``) to graphically display data
* a data providers collection (``Glpi\Dashboard\Provider``) that queries the database
* rights (``Glpi\Dashboard\Right``) on each dashboard
* filters (``Glpi\Dashboard\Filter``) that can be displayed in a dashboard header and impacting providers.
```
```suggestion
* a widget collection (``Glpi\Dashboard\Widget``) to graphically display data
* a data provider collection (``Glpi\Dashboard\Provider``) that queries the database
* rights (``Glpi\Dashboard\Right``) on each dashboard
* filters (``Glpi\Dashboard\Filter``) that can be displayed in a dashboard header and impacting providers.
```

With thos classes, we can build a dashboard that will display cards on its grid.
A card is a combination of a widget, a data provider, a place on grid and various options (like a background colour for example).

> Completing existing
> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Completing existing concepts
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```

> From your plugin, you can complete those concepts with your own data and code.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
From your plugin, you can complete these concepts with your own data and code.
```

                     <img src='https://www.linux.org/images/logo.png'>
                  </div>";

         return $html;
      }

       static function cardBigNumberProvider(array $params = [])
       {
           $default_params = [
               'label' => null,
               'icon'  => null,
           ];
           $params = array_merge($default_params, $params);

           return [
               'number' => rand(),
               'url'    => "https://www.linux.org/",
               'label'  => "plugin example - some text",
               'icon'   => "fab fa-linux", // font awesome icon
           ];
      }
   }

A few explanations on those methods:

* ``getTypes()``: define available widgets for cards and methods to call for display.
* ``getCards()``: define available cards for dashboards (when added to the grid). As previously explained, each is defined from a label, widget and optional data provider (from core or your plugin) combination
* ``cardWidget()``: use provided parameters to display HTML. You are free to delegate display to a Twig template, and use your favourite JavaScript library.

> * ``cardWidgetWithoutProvider()``: almost the same as the ``cardWidget()``, but doe snot use parameters and just returns a static HTML.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* ``cardWidgetWithoutProvider()``: almost the same as the ``cardWidget()``, but does not use parameters and just returns a static HTML.
```

* ``cardBigNumberProvider()``: provider and expected return example when grid will display card.

Display your own dashboard
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> GLPI dashboards system is modular, you can use it in your own displays.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
GLPI dashboards system is modular and you can use it in your own displays.
```

.. code-block:: php
   :linenos:

   <?php

   use Glpi\Dashboard\Grid;

   $dashboard = new Grid('myplugin_example_dashboard', 10, 10, 'myplugin');
   $dashboard->show();

By adding a context (``myplugin``), you can filter dashboards available in the dropdown list at the top right of the grid. You will not see GLPI core ones (central, assistance, etc.).

Translating your plugins
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In many places in current document, code exmaples takes care of using `gettext`_ GLPI notations to display strings to users.

> Event if your plugin will be restricted, it is a good practice to keep this `gettext`_ usage.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Even if your plugin will be private, it is a good practice to keep this `gettext`_ usage.
```

See :doc:`developper guide translation documentation <../devapi/translations>` for more explanations and list of PHP functions that can be used.

> * On your local instance, you cans use software like `poedit <https://poedit.net>`_ to manage your translations.
> * You can also rely on on-line services like `Transifex <https://www.transifex.com>`_ or `Weblate <https://weblate.org>`_ (both are free for open source projects).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* On your local instance, you can use software like `poedit <https://poedit.net>`_ to manage your translations.
* You can also rely on online services like `Transifex <https://www.transifex.com>`_ or `Weblate <https://weblate.org>`_ (both are free for open source projects).
```

> If you have used the `Empty`_ skeleton, you will benefit from command line tools to manage your locales:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you have used the `Empty`_ plugin skeleton, you will benefit from command line tools to manage your locales:
```

.. code-block:: shell

   # extract strings to translate from your source code
   # and put them in the locales/myplugin.pot file
   vendor/bin/extract-locales

.. warning::

    ℹ️  It is possible your translations are not updated after compiling MO files, a restart of your PHP (or web server, depending on your configuration) may be required.

REST API
--------

Since GLPI (since 9.1 release) has an external API in REST format. An XMLRPC format is also still available, but is deprecated.

.. image:: /_static/images/API.png
   :alt: API configuration

Configuration
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

For security reasons, API is disabled bu default.

> From the ``Configuration > General, API tab`` menu, you can enable it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
From the ``Setup > General, API tab`` menu, you can enable it.
```

It's available from your instance at:

* ``http://path/to/glpi/apirest.php``
* ``http://path/to/glpi/apixmlrpc.php``

> First link includes an integrated documentation when you access it from a simple browser (a link is provided as soon as the API is active).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The first link includes an integrated documentation when you access it from a simple browser (a link is provided as soon as the API is active).
```

For the rest of the configuration:

* login allows to use ``login`` / ``password`` as well as web interface
* token connection use the token displayed in user preferences

  .. image:: /_static/images/api_external_token.png
     :alt: external token

* API clients allow to limit API access from some IP addresses and log if necessary. A client allowing access from any IP is provided by default.

----

You can use the `API usage bootstrap <https://github.com/orthagh/glpi_boostrap_api>`_.

> This one is written in PHP and relies on `Guzzle <http://docs.guzzlephp.org/>`_ library to hanlde HTTP requests.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This one is written in PHP and relies on `Guzzle <http://docs.guzzlephp.org/>`_ library to handle HTTP requests.
```

By default, it does a connection with login details defined in the ``config.inc.php`` file (that you must create by copying the ``config.inc.example`` file).

.. warning::

>     ⚠️ Make sure the script is working as expected before going on.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    ⚠️ Make sure the script is working as expected before continuing.
```

API usage
^^^^^^^^^

> To learn this part, with the help of integrate documentation (or `latest stable GLPI API documentation on github <https://github.com/glpi-project/glpi/blob/master/apirest.md>`_), we will do several exercises:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To learn this part, with the help of integrated documentation (or `latest stable GLPI API documentation on github <https://github.com/glpi-project/glpi/blob/master/apirest.md>`_), we will do several exercises:
```

       $migration->executeMigration();

       return true;
   }

In addition, of a primary key, ``VARCHAR`` field to store a name entered by the user and a flag for the the trashbin.

.. note::
    📝 You of course can add some other fields with other types (stay reasonable 😉).

To handle migration from a version to another of our plugin, we will use GLPI `Migration`_ class.

**🗋 hook.php**

.. code-block:: php
   :linenos:

   <?php

   use Migration;

   function plugin_myplugin_install()
   {
       global $DB;

       // instantiate migration with version
       $migration = new Migration(PLUGIN_MYPLUGIN_VERSION);

       ...

       if ($DB->tableExists($table)) {
           // missing field
           $migration->addField(
               $table,
               'fieldname',
               'string'
           );

           // missing index
           $migration->addKey(
               $table,
               'fieldname'
           );
       }

       //execute the whole migration
       $migration->executeMigration();

       return true;
   }

.. warning::

  ℹ️ `Migration `_ class provides several methods that permit to manipulate tables and fields.

>   All calls will be stored in queue that will be executed when calling ``executeMigration`` method.

Reviewer: Seems because of the previous extra space on "Migration" link.

    Note GLPI forms submitted as ``POST`` will be protected with a CRSF token..
    You can include a hidden field to validate the form:

    .. code-block:: twig

        <input type="hidden" name="_glpi_csrf_token" value="{{ csrf_token() }}">

    We will also display a list of computers already associated below the form.

.. _using-core-objects:

Using core objects
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

We can also allow our class to add tabs on core objects.
We will declare this in a new line in our ``init`` function:

**🗋 setup.php**

.. code-block:: php
   :linenos:

   <?php

   use Computer;

   function plugin_init_myplugin()
   {
      ...

       Plugin::registerClass(GlpiPlugin\Myplugin\Superasset_Item::class, [
           'addtabon' => Computer::class
       ]);
   }

Title and content for this tab are done as previously with:

* ``CommonDBTM::getTabNameForItem()``
* ``CommonDBTM::displayTabContentForItem()``

.. note::

    📝 **Exercise**:
    Complete previous methods to display on computers a new tab with associated ``Superasset``.

Defining Search options
-----------------------

> :ref`Search options <search_options>` is an array of columns for GLPI search engine. They are used to know for each itemtype how the database must be queried, and how data should be dosplayed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:ref:`Search options <search_options>` is an array of columns for GLPI search engine. They are used to know for each itemtype how the database must be queried, and how data should be dosplayed.
```

           ) }}

           <button type="submit" class="btn btn-primary mx-1" name="update" value="1">
               <i class="ti ti-device-floppy"></i>
               <span>{{ _x('button', 'Save') }}</span>
           </button>
       </form>
   {% endif %}

This skeleton retrieves the calls to a tab in the ``Setup > General`` menu to display the dedicated form.
It is useless to add a ``front`` file because the GLPI ``Config`` object already offers a form display.

Note that we display, from the ``myplugin_computer_form`` two yes/no fields named ``myplugin_computer_tab`` and ``myplugin_computer_form``.

.. note::

    ✍️ Complete ``setup.php`` file by defining the new tab in the ``Config`` class.

    You also have to add those new configuration entries management to install/uninstall methods.
    You can use the following:

    .. code-block:: php

        <?php

        use Config;

        Config::setConfigurationValues('##context##', [
            '##config_name##' => '##config_default_value##'
        ]);

    .. code-block:: php

        <?php

        use Config;

        $config = new Config();
        $config->deleteByCriteria(['context' => '##context##']);

>     *Do not forget to replace ``##`` surrounded terms with your own values*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Do not forget to replace ``##`` surrounded terms with your own values!
```

Managing rights
---------------

To limit access to our plugin features to some of our users, we can use the GLPI `Profile`_ class.

This will check ``$rightname`` property of class that inherits `CommonDBTM`_ for all standard events.
Those check are done by static ``can*`` functions:

> * `canCreate <https://forge.glpi-project.org/apidoc/class-CommonDBTM.html#_canCreate>`_ for `add <(https://forge.glpi-project.org/apidoc/class-CommonDBTM.html#_add>`_)

Reviewer: done

The GLPI notification system allows sending alerts to the actors of a recorded event.
By default, notifications can be sent by email or as browser notifications, but other channels may be available from plugins (or you can add your own one).

That system is divided in several classes:

* ``Notification``: the triggering item. It receives common data like name, if it is active, sending mode, event, content (``NotificationTemplate``), etc.

   .. image:: /_static/images/Notification.png
      :alt: Add notification form

* ``NotificationTarget``: defines notification recipients.
    It is possible to define recipients based on the triggering item (author, assignee) or static recipients (a specific user, all users of a specific group, etc).

   .. image:: /_static/images/NotificationTarget.png
      :alt: Choose actor form

* ``NotificationTemplate``: notification templates are used to build the content, which can be chosen from Notification form. CSS can be defined in the templates and it receives one or more ``NotificationTemplateTranslation`` instances.

   .. image:: /_static/images/NotificationTemplate.png
      :alt: Notification template form

> * ``NotificationTemplateTranslation``: defines the translated template content. If no language is specified, it will be the default translation. If no template translation exists for a user's language, the default translation will be used.

Author: This part is displayed as bold in readthedocs, don't know why

Reviewer: Because a blank line is missing on next sentence (do not ask me why it renders as bold :D)

>     The content is dynamically generated with tags provided to the user and completed by HTML.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

    The content is dynamically generated with tags provided to the user and completed by HTML.
```

Plugin development tutorial
===========================

.. warning::

>     ⚠️ Several pre-requisites are required in order to follow this tutorial:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    ⚠️ Several prerequisites are required in order to follow this tutorial:
```

    - A base knowledge of GLPI usage
    - A correct level in web development:

        - PHP
        - HTML
        - CSS
        - SQL

>         - Javascript (Jquery)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        - JavaScript (JQuery)
```

    - Being familiar with command line usage

> 📝 In this first part, we will create a plugin we will name "My plugin" (key: ``myplugin``).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
📝 In this first part, we will create a plugin named "My plugin" (key: ``myplugin``).
```

We will cover project startup as well as the setup of base elements.

> Pre-requisites

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Prerequisites
```

--------------

> Here are all the bricks you need to start your GLPI plugin project:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here are all the things you need to start your GLPI plugin project:
```

* a functional web server,
* latest `GLPI <https://github.com/glpi-project/glpi/releases>`_ stable release installed locally

> * a text editor or any EDI (like `vscode <https://code.visualstudio.com>`_ or `phpstorm <https://www.jetbrains.com/phpstorm/>`_),

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* a text editor or any IDE (like `vscode <https://code.visualstudio.com>`_ or `phpstorm <https://www.jetbrains.com/phpstorm/>`_),
```

* `git <https://git-scm.com/>`_ version management software.

> * `Composer`_ PHP dependency software

Reviewer 2: Also need node/npm

Start your project
------------------

.. warning::

>     ⚠️ If you have prodution data in your GLPI instance, make sure you disabled all notifications before begining the development.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    ⚠️ If you have production data in your GLPI instance, make sure you disable all notifications before beginning the development.
```

::

   cd empty
   chmod +x plugin.sh
   ./plugin.sh myplugin 0.0.1

.. note::

    | ℹ️ Several conditions must be respected choosing a plugin name: no space or special character is allowed.
    | This name will be used to declare your plugin directory, as well as methods, constants, database tables and so on.
    | ``My-Plugin`` will therefore create the ``MyPlugin`` directory.
    | Using capital characters will cause issues for some core functions.

    Keep it simple!

When running the command, a new directory ``myplugin`` will be created at the same level as the ``empty`` directory (both in ``/path/to/glpi/plugin`` directory) as well as files and methods associated with an empty plugin skeleton.

.. note::

    ℹ️ If you cloned the ``empty`` project outside your GLPI instance, you can define a destination directory for your new plugin:

    .. code-block:: shell

        ./plugin.sh myplugin 0.0.1 /path/to/another/glpi/plugins/

Retrieving `Composer`_ dependencies
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In a terminal, run the following command:

::

   cd /path/to/glpi/plugins/myplugin

>    composer install

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   composer build
```

> Minipal plugin structure

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Minimal plugin structure
```

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. raw:: html

   <pre>
   📂 glpi
     📂 plugins
       📂 myplugin
          📁 ajax
          📁 front
          📁 src
          📁 locales
          📁 tools
          📁 vendor
          🗋 composer.json
          🗋 hook.php
          🗋 LICENSE
          🗋 myplugin.xml
          🗋 myplugin.png
          🗋 Readme.md
          🗋 setup.php
   </pre>

> * ``📂 front`` directory is used to store our objects actions (create, read, update, delete).
> * ``📂 ajax`` directory is used for ajax calls.
> * Your plugin own classes will be sotred in the ``📂 src`` directory.
> * `gettext`_ translations will be stored in the ``📂 locales`` directory.
> * An optional ``📂 templates`` directory would contain your plugin `Twig <https://twig.symfony.com/>`_ templates files.
> * ``📂 tools`` directory provide some optional scripts provided from empty plugin for developmen,t and maintainance of your plugin. It is now more common to get those scripts from ``📂 vendor`` and ``📂 node_modules`` directories.
> * ``📂 vendor`` directory contains:
> 
>   * PHP libvraries for your plugin,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* ``📂 front`` directory is used to store our object actions (create, read, update, delete).
* ``📂 ajax`` directory is used for ajax calls.
* Your plugin own classes will be stored in the ``📂 src`` directory.
* `gettext`_ translations will be stored in the ``📂 locales`` directory.
* An optional ``📂 templates`` directory would contain your plugin `Twig <https://twig.symfony.com/>`_ template files.
* ``📂 tools`` directory provides some optional scripts from the empty plugin for development and maintenance of your plugin. It is now more common to get those scripts from ``📂 vendor`` and ``📂 node_modules`` directories.
* ``📂 vendor`` directory contains:

  * PHP libraries for your plugin,
```

  * helpful tools provided by ``empty`` model.

> * ``📂 node_modules`` directory contains javascript libraries for your plugin.
> * ``🗋 composer.json`` files describes PHP dependencies for your project.
> * ``🗋 package.json`` file describes javascript dependencies for your project.
> * ``🗋 myplugin.xml`` file contains data description for :ref:`publishing your plugin <plugin_publication>`.
> * ``🗋 myplugin.png`` image is often included in previous XML file as a representation for `GLPI plugins catalog <http://plugins.glpi-project.org>`_
> * ``🗋 setup.php`` file is meant to :ref:`instanciate your plugin <plugin_minimal_setupphp>`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* ``📂 node_modules`` directory contains JavaScript libraries for your plugin.
* ``🗋 composer.json`` files describes PHP dependencies for your project.
* ``🗋 package.json`` file describes JavaScript dependencies for your project.
* ``🗋 myplugin.xml`` file contains data description for :ref:`publishing your plugin <plugin_publication>`.
* ``🗋 myplugin.png`` image is often included in previous XML file as a representation for `GLPI plugins catalog <http://plugins.glpi-project.org>`_
* ``🗋 setup.php`` file is meant to :ref:`instantiate your plugin <plugin_minimal_setupphp>`.
```
